---
title: 'RFC6749 - The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework'
language: 'en-US'
status: 'Notes'
date: '2018-06-01'
---

[RFC6749 - The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749)

# Abstract

> [...] enables a third-party application to obtain limited access to an HTTP service, either on behalf of a resource Owner by orchestrating an approval interaction between the resource owner and the HTTP service, or by allowing the third-party application to obtain access on its own behalf.

# 1. Introduction

> In the traditional client-server authentication model, the client requests an access-restricted resource (protected resource) on the server by authenticating with the server using the resource owner's credentials.

Some problems arise with this approach:

* Third-party apps need to store the resource owner credentials.
* Servers need to support password authentication.
* Third-party apps gain overly broad access to the resource owner's protected resources.
* Resource owners cannot revoke access to specific third-parties.
* Compromise of third-parties results in compromise of resource owner's credentials and the data protected by that credentials.

OAuth introduces an authorization layer and separates the roles of the client from that of the resource owner. Using OAuth a different set of credentials is issued for the client.

Instead of using the resource owner's credentials, the client obtains an access tokens. Access tokens are issued to third-party clients by an authorization server with the approval of the resource owner.

**OAuth is designed for use with HTTP.**

**OAuth 2.0 is not retrocompatible with OAuth 1.0.**

## 1.1. Roles

OAuth defines four roles:

### Resource Owner / End-user

> An entity capable of granting access to a protected resource.

When the resource owner is a person, it is  referred to as an end-user.

### Resource Server

> The server hosting the protected resources, capable of accepting and responding to protected resource requests using access tokens.

### Client

> An application making protected resource requests on behalf of the resource owner and with its authorization. The term "client" does not imply any particular implementation characteristics (e.g., whether the application executes on a server, a desktop, or other devices).

### Authorization Server

> The server issuing access tokens to the client after successfully authenticating the resource owner and obtaining authorization.

## 1.2. Protocol flow

1. The client requests authorization from the resource owner. Preferably indirectly via the authorization server as intermediary.

2. The client receives an authorization grant, which is a credential representing the resource owner's authorization. There are four types of authorization grant defined in this spec, it might exist extensions.
3. The client requests an access token by authenticating with the authorization server and presenting the authorization grant.
4. The authorization server authenticates the client and validates the authorization grant, and if valid, issues an access token.
5. The client requests the protected resource from the resource server and authenticates by presenting the access token.
6. The resource server validates the access token, and if valid, serves the request.

## 1.3. Authorization Grant

> An authorization grant is a credential representing the resource owner's authorization (to access its protected resources) used by the client to obtain the access token.

The RFC 6749 defines four grant types: authorization code, implicit, resource owner password credentials and client credentials.

### 1.3.1. Authorization Code

The client redirects the resource owner to an authentication server, which acts as intermediary. The authentication server authenticates the resource owner and the resource owner can authorize the client. Once the client is authorized, the authorization server directs the resource owner back to the client with the authorization code.

> Because the resource owner only authenticates with the authorization server, the resource owner's credentials are never shared with the client.

Pros:

* Authenticates the client
* Transmission of the token directly to the client

Cons:

* Two step authentication, therefore, more round trips.

### 1.3.2. Implicit

The implicit grant is a simplified version of the authorization code.

> [...] (it's) optimized for clients implemented in a browser using a scripting language such as Javascript.

Instead of issuing an authorization code, the Implicit grant issues directly the access token.

It's called implicit because there is no need of intermediary credentials such as authorization code.

Cons:

* Server doesn't authenticates the client
  * It might be possible to identify based on the redirect uri
* The access token may be exposed to the resource owner or other apps running in the user-agent.

Pro:

* One step authentication, therefore, less round trips. Improve responsiveness and efficiency.

### 1.3.3. Resource Owner Password Credentials

> The resource owner password credentials(i.e., username and password) can be used directly as an authorization grant to obtain an access token.

Resource owner password credentials should only be used when there is a high degree of trust between the resource owner and the client or if you don't have the option for other grant types.

The resource owner's credentials are used only once to exchange for the access token.

> This grant type can eliminate the need for the client to store the resource owner credentials for future use,  by exchanging the credentials with a long-lived access token or refresh token.

### 1.3.4. Client Credentials

> The client is acting on its own behalf (the client is also the resource owner)[...]

or 

> The authorization scope is limited to the protected resources under the control of the client, or to protected resources previously arranged with the authorization server.

Pro: 

* One step authentication, therefore, less round trips. Improve responsiveness and efficiency.

## 1.4 Access Token

> Access tokens are credentials used to access protected resources.

It represents an authorization issue to the client with a specific scope and durations of access. The token is granted by the resource owner and enforced by the resource server nad authorization server.

The access token provides an abstraction layer, replacing different authorization constructs, like username and password with a single token understood by the resource server. It enables to issue token with different authorizations than the authorization grant used to obtain the token.

Access tokens can have different formats, structures, and methods of utilization.

## 1.5 Refresh Token

Refresh token are credentials used to obtain access tokens when the current access token becomes invalid or expires.

The authorization server issues the refresh token together with the access token. They are intended for us only with authorization servers and are never sent to the resource server.

1. The client requests an access token by authenticating with the authorization server and presenting an authorization grant.
2. The authorization server authenticates the client and validates the authorization grant, and if valid, issues an access token and a refresh token.
3. The client can requests a protected resource (sending the access token) and the resource server validates the access token, and if valid, provides the protected resource the client requested.
4. (Once the access token expires) The client requests a protected resource and the resource server reject to serve because the access token expired.
5. The client requests a new access token by authenticating with the authentication server and presenting the refresh token.
6. The authentication server validates the client and its refresh token, and if valid, issues a new access token (and, optionally, a new refresh token).

## 1.6 TLS Version

The TLS version varies. At the time of the writing the TLS 1.2 was the most recent, but with a more restricted base of deployments. While the TLS 1.0 provided the broader interoperability.

## 1.7 HTTP Redirections

OAuth 2.0 makes heavy usage of HTTP redirection. HTTP redirection code are considered implementation detail.

## 1.8 Interoperability

OAuth 2.0 provides a rich authorization framework. The framework is hightly extensible and flexible and is expected to have a wide range of non-interoperable implementations.

This specification also lets few require components partially or fully undefined. Therefore, it was designed with the clear expectation that future work will come to fulfill this gaps.

## 1.9 Notational conventions

Uses keywords as decribed in RFC 2119.

# 2. Client Registration

> Before initiating the protocol, the client registers with the authorization server.

The client registration is beyond the scope of this specification.

When registering a client, the client must:

* specify the client type
* provide its client redirection URI 
* include any other information required by the authorization server

## 2.1 Client Types

OAuth 2.0 defines two client types based on their ability to authenticate securely with the authorization server.

* confidential: Clients capable of maintaining the confidentiality of their credentials, or capable of secure client authentication by other means. E.g. web application.
* public: Clients incapable of maintaining the confidentiality of their credentials, and incapable of secure client authentication via any other means. E.g. web-broser based.

A client may be implemented as a distributed set of components, each with a different client type. Either the authorization server should provide support for such clients or the clients should be registered as separeta clients.

These are the clients profiles considered:

* web application: It's considered a confidential client running on a web server. The client credentials as well as any access token issued to the client are stored on the web server and are not exposed nor accessible by the resource owner.
* user-agent-based application: It's considered a public client in which the client code is downloaded from a web server and executes within a user-agent on the device used by the resource owner. Protocol data and credentials are easily accessible and often visible to the resource owner.
* native application: It's considered a public client installed and executed on the device used by the resource owner. Protocol data and credentials are easily accessible and often visible to the resource owner.

## 2.2 Client identifier











